people always ask what is the definition
of woke well the definition of woke as I
mentioned in the book is the making
sacred of historically marginalized race
gender and sexual identity groups that's
it that's the one sentence definition
and that is also what I would say what I
would describe as the kind of big bang
of our moral order and out of that
emerges a kind of very fuzzy folk
ideology which says um so these to the
sacred groups um those groups cannot be
offended so anything you say that might
be interpreted by the most sensitive
member of such a group as offensive
marks you out as a a blasphemer you're
profaning the sacred you must be
excommunicated I.E canceled the other
part of this is absolute equality in
terms of prestigious positions and
resources uh between these groups so for
example you can't have a race gap or a
gender gap in terms of the boardroom in
terms of admittance to ilite
universities and so on it's got to be
zero so equality plus emotional safety
these are the two pillars of this
ideology but the point I make is this
ideology is not some kind of system like
loan liberalism or even Marxism that is
uh it is more of a bottomup empathizing
rather than a top-down systematizing
cognitive thing it's much more emotional
we're attached concretely to the black
civil rights movement to the indigenous
to the LGBT movement ments and it's our
romanticization and sympathy for these
concrete groups that provides our
meaning and that's Primary in the system
it's not a set of ideas like Marxism
it's actually a set of attach emotional
attachments and so this is very much
emotional and it's driven from the
ground up okay so let me let me ask you
let me ask you some questions about that
okay so I
guess you you you you pulled out two
strings there you you did associate the
system of ideas with liberal
progressivism let's say starting in the
early 20th
century but then you are also stressing
the more emotional side of it uh let's
call it the compassionate side so I I
want to ask you and and you talked about
it as bottomup and emotion-driven
so it seems to me that there's the
analysis of the woke phenomena
has revealed a number of potentially
fundamental
causal elements you pointed to Liberal
progressivism and compassion and the
role of emotion let's say other people
have pointed to the role of like a kind
of a metam Marxism so it's the marxists
of course divided the world into victim
and victimizer essentially on economic
grounds the difference now is that that
that same narrative seems to play out
out there are victims and there are
victimizers but there is a number of
Dimensions along which that axis of
inequality can reveal itself and you
talked about uh race gender and
sexuality there there's other axes as
well but those are likely the primary
ones and then with regards to the
emotional side this is something I can't
help wondering about and no one is
talking about it and I can understand
why we did a series of studies in that
were published in 2006 16 which was
pretty much when I left the university
so it never got completed but we
identified a group of ideas that that
hung together statistically that we
called politically correct
authoritarianism deviated to some degree
from say the liberal
progressivist ethos in that the people
who adopted the set of ideas were
perfectly willing to use compulsion and
force that being perhaps the primary
distinction the predictor that we found
that determined whether or not people
adopted those beliefs were first of all
low verbal intelligence that was a
walloping predictor and the second one
was being female and the third one was
having a female temperament and the
fourth one was having ever taken even
one politically correct course and so
one of the things I'm very curious about
see I've been thinking
that one of the things that we're
seeing is the increased female
domination of the University system
especially in the humanities and the
social sciences and I think there's a
fundamental feminine ethos that's
instinctive that can be made more
sophisticated with genuine education but
that has a proclivity to divide the
world up into predators and infants and
woe beide you if you happen to fall into
the Predator Camp it's very tightly
allied with the victim victimizer
narrative and you know you do point out
in your book that there is a
predilection for women between the ages
of 18 and 34 and this is being shown
everywhere they're way out of lockstep
without it with every other demographic
group way more Progressive far more
radically left way more likely to uh
identify for example to even claim that
the Hamas terrorists are victims in some
sense which is just an absolute Miracle
of interpretation so so we've identified
a number of streams there's a Marxist
influence there's a postmodern influence
which we haven't talked about there's a
liberal Progressive influence there's an
emotional influence and and then I don't
know if you have any specific thoughts
about how the increasing female
domination especially of the humanities
and the social sciences plays into that
because that's a major league cultural
revolution the fact that the
universities are dominated for example
administratively as well by females and
so I know that's a hell of a thing to
ask you to talk about right off the bat
but I think that's actually really
interesting and I I think it is a
contributing factor but I just want to
sort of put in a couple of caveats and
the first is we only see this female
effect amongst young people so older
women we don't find greater support for
Castel culture it's very much seems to
be among young women the second thing is
if you were to go back to 1970 for
example women were you know there's a
survey done every year in the US H
higher higher education Research
Institute 100,000 freshman 18-year-olds
entering American universities uh in
1970 women were somewhat more
conservative than men 18-year-old women
18-year-old men and it's really not till
2004 we start to see those 18-year-old
women starting to be more liberal than
the men and that's now widened to about
15 points um and so something's happened
to women in the recent period That's the
first first point to note so and that's
the other thing is that fire which
foundation for individual rights and
expression does an annual survey in the
US 55,000 so there's a lot of survey
data in the book I I I try and ground
this as much as possible in the data so
they ask questions for example is it
okay to shout down or block somebody
from speaking and on those questions
actually um especially using violence to
to prevent somebody from speaking women
are less likely than men to support that
on blocking their about as like likely
where women really stand out is should a
speaker come to campus who wants to say
something that might be offensive so for
example uh to that says BLM is a hate
group that says trans is a mental
disorder there you see a big gender gap
uh and you see it also amongst
Republican women by the way versus
Republican men so it seems like the
attitude the sort of there's the
authoritarian I want to do violence
which is I think not gendered or it may
even be somewhat more male but there's
this protective oh I don't want anyone's
feelings to be hurt and that I think is
more female um so I think there are some
nuances here the what I would say I mean
the way I think about it is women will
tend to back up this the the whatever is
the moral order if the moral order is a
woke moral order they'll back that up if
it's a religious or patriotic moral
order they'll be more likely to back
that up whereas men will be more likely
to be the contrarians I think because
it's you know people will talk about
well women are more compassionate but
but the point is compassionate to who
like compassionate to well that is the
point that's for sure that's the point
so compassionate to the transitioner or
the D transitioner compassionate to the
TR the biological male wants to enter a
woman's shelter or woman's prison or the
women in the prison I mean the ideology
is what tells you who to be
compassionate towards so if we if we go
back to the liberal progressives Jane
Adams was relatively PR lynching or at
least thought that wasn't a bad idea
because she was very very empathetic
towards white women and so she was
willing to accept that there were these
black male predators and buy into that
framing so what I'm just saying is I
think what's happened is an ideology has
crept in and told women who to be
compassionate towards and who not to
care about so okay so your point
fundamentally is that I believe is
that the the ideology specifies the
victim victimizer Dimension and
identifies the victim now do you think
do you think it's so when we when when
we when we did our study it was
agreeable I said it was being female and
having a female temperament those were
both predictors we never saw that in any
study we ever did looking at what
predicted beliefs for example if
generally if we controlled for
temperament sex had no effect but that
wasn't the case in this specific
situation which which I thought was
extremely telling and so and it's also
very interesting as you pointed out that
it's young women in particular and I
can't help
as someone you know psychoanalytically
influenced I can't help but think that a
fair chunk of this is misplaced maternal
Instinct I I believe that the young
women who are in by and large childless
in the years when they shouldn't be are
unbelievably sensitive well let's talk
about what happened in 2004 you know you
said that's when women started to shift
their political priorities now I know
from people who've been investigating
this that um Tik Tok is a particularly
pernicious influence especially with
regards to the campus protests that are
occurring right now and The Tick Tock
short videos that are fostering that the
campus protests at least among women
focus on compassion for the war victims
to to to the ultimate degree and they
seem to be extraordinarily effective but
there's a real problem here that needs
to be wrestled with because if it is the
case that young women are differentially
sensitive to a certain kind of
propaganda and they often and they also
increasingly occup the majority
positions in uh University institutions
for example then we have a whole new
kind of social problem on our hands
because we've never had it's only been
in the last 30 years that we've had the
opportunity to see what female dominant
large institutions would look like right
that's historically unprecedented we
have no idea what pathologies or
advantages those systems might have so
what do you think happened in 2004 like
why did the tide start to turn then so
my interpret there's other data s data
series that we can see changing so
political donations shifting towards the
Democrats for example around roughly the
same time now political donations come
for people who are Highly Educated
relatively well off for example I think
what what happens in the US anyway is
you get George W bush who's more of a
populist not an elite style conservative
who's just about tax and spend for
example and I actually think you see you
know he's also to some degree advancing
the agenda of the religious right to
some degree I think this populist style
cultural conservatism doesn't work as
well with the elite opinion formers and
so they start to drift away in terms of
political donations and the the if you
like the kind of background the ambiant
noise the mood music that is coming
through the elite institutions the
schools the culture just starts to turn
against uh Republicans and conservatism
for example so I actually think women
are a kind of rof they kind of reflect
what is the dominant ethos in a society
or at least At The Prestige ethos in a
society so if we actually swung the
ethos against wokeism I think women
would be in the Forefront of that uh I
don't think there's anything biological
so I I am a so more of a sociologist and
a political scientist so I tend to
approach these things from a kind of
Sociology of emotions perspective which
says that ideas can tell you which
emotions to turn off and which emotions
to express now of course that's
refracted through things like gender so
in this case I think women will just
back up and reinforce the dominant
values dominant ideology of the Elites
in a society um so I'm not as convinced
why the elites why do you think it's
okay why would women specifically back
up the dominant ideology of the elites
is do you think that's a consequence of
something like hypergamy or what's your
what's your theory about that because
it's weird if they're also standing up
from the for The Underdogs is it that
they accept the elite differentiation of
who's an underdog and who's a power
monger and then and and and then why is
that associated with with youth let's
say with with women I'm trying to
disentangle all that well I think there
are a couple of things I mean one is the
education system uh which I think shifts
in this direction in a big way I mean it
was there in a few radical centers like
Berkeley and the Toronto District School
Board greater London Council so you you
had these crazy places but what's
happened is scaling up so what my book
talks a lot about is these ideas
actually go back quite a long way but
it's the scaling up now it's in every
school so I did a couple of studies with
the man Manhattan Institute you know 90%
of 18 to 20 year old Americans that I
interviewed you know sent the survey to
said that they had encountered at least
one critical race Theory concept from an
adult in school in in Britain it was
about you know it was a majority as well
not as high but a majority so it's sat
it's hitting saturation level so that's
what women are getting in class and then
they see it in the institutions that
maybe in the workplace uh in the
government so they they're seeing this
thing Dei everywhere and so they think
yeah this is the way you have to be a
good moral person and they simply
reinforce those values
[Music]